# Changelog

## chromConverter (development version)

### Breaking changes

- Consolidated `sample_id` and `vial` metadata fields into new
  `sample_position` field.
- Added `sparse` argument for `rainbow` parser (now enabled by default)
  to remove zeros form long-format MS data.
- Changed order of `what` arguments in `read_agilent_d` to prioritize
  DAD data (instead of 2D chromatograms).
- Fixed bug so that Varian long-format MS data is returned as a
  data.frame by default (rather than a matrix).

### New features

- Added support for reading Agilent Common Analytical Markup Language
  (ACAML) files.
- Added preliminary support for reading ‚ÄúChromatotec‚Äù `.Chrom` files
  through the `read_chromatotec` function.
- Added support for reading regular utf8-encoded `csv` files.
- Pass source file through when reading `agilent_dx` files so that the
  original source file is stored in metadata instead of a temp file.

### Improved support for exporting files

- Added option to write ARW files in `write_chroms`. This format seems
  to be the simplest way to get DAD data into `OpenChrom`.
- Added support for writing standard utf8-encoded `csv` files and fixed
  a bug causing column names to be prepended with ‚ÄúX‚Äù.
- Modified `write_chroms` so it invisibly returns file names of the
  exported chromatograms.
- Improved error handling within `write_chroms`.

#### CDF

- Fixed bug causing failure to write chromatograms with missing
  attributes to `.cdf` (thanks to
  [@pbulsink](https://github.com/pbulsink) for PR
  [\#37](https://github.com/ethanbass/chromConverter/issues/37)).
- Fixed bug causing failure to write existing timestamp data to `.cdf`
  files.
- Added additional metadata fields to exported CDF files.
- Added additional test for writing CDF files with missing attributes.
- Fixed CDF time range metadata bug.

#### mzML

- Fixed `write_mzml` to correctly handle DAD spectra.
- Added chromatograms to mzML files written by `write_mzml`.

### Other bug fixes and minor changes

- Fixed entab parser so it translates `.ch` files to wide format when
  specified.
- Fixed bug in `read_agilent_d` when subsetting data with the `what`
  argument.
- Fixed Waters ARW parser so it can read files with missing metadata.
- Added assumption that time units for data generated by `rainbow`
  parser are in minutes.
- Rainbow parser now returns sparse MS data by default (excluding zeros)
  when long format is requested to match format returned by other
  parsers.
- Fixed problems with Aston converters due to changes in reticulate
  behavior.
- Fixed bug so that data from ANDI MS netCDF files can be returned as
  `data.table` object when specified by user.
- Fixed ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô QGD bug affecting large values. Resolves
  ([\#44](https://github.com/ethanbass/chromConverter/issues/44)).
- Fixed bug causing sample_position/vial metadata to be dropped when
  reading Agilent files.

## chromConverter 0.8.0

- Improved support for ‚ÄòAgilent Openlab‚Äô `.dx` files: extraction of DAD
  and auxiliary instrumental data (stored in `.IT` files).
- Refactored `read_shimadzu_qgd` for a 1.4x speedup in the parsing of
  Shimadzu `.qgd` files, cutting execution time by 30%.
- Refactored `read_shimadzu_lcd` for a 2.4x speedup in the parsing of
  Shimadzu `.lcd` files, cutting execution time by 60%.
- Refactored `write_mzml` for massive speed-up when writing mzML files,
  especially for large MS data.
- Fixed ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô metadata time zone offsets.
- Fixed misplaced parentheses in `read_agilent_d` causing possible bug.
- Fixed bug in `read_chemstation_uv` causing error for long format data.
- Added more informative error messages for `read_agilent_d`.
- Added additional tests for retention times and `data_format`
  attribute.
- Added `data_format` and `read_metadata` arguments for
  `read_chemstation_csv`.
- Fixed incorrect `data_format` attributes for MS data to reflect that
  they are always returned in long format.
- Fixed documentation to accurately reflect the fact that MS data is
  always returned in long format.
- Automatically return long format when `data.table` output is selected
  since data.tables do not have rownames.
- Fixed error due to fractional timezones in Shimadzu metadata (e.g.,
  India +05:30).
- Fixed bug in `write_mzml` causing retention time shifts for BPC and
  TIC.
- Rewrote `configure_python_environment` function to facilitate
  configuration of a chromConverter virtual environment or conda
  environment, though a dedicated environment is no longer required (as
  of chromConverter v0.7.4).
- Fixed bug in `collapse` argument causing functions to return vector
  when `format_out` is `data.frame`.
- Fixed bug causing elimination of retention times when `format_out` is
  `data.table`.
- Enabled `data.table` format in `read_shimadzu_ascii`.
- Enabled automatic recognition of ‚ÄòAgilent OpenLab‚Äô `.dx` file by
  `read_chroms`.
- Fixed long format output for `read_shimadzu` (‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ASCII files).
- Fixed timezone issue in some ‚ÄòAgilent ChemStation‚Äô files.

## chromConverter 0.7.5

CRAN release: 2025-03-31

- **Changes to `sample_names` argument in `read_chroms`:** This argument
  can no longer be supplied with a vector of names. Instead,
  `sample_names` can be provided with one of two arguments: `basename`
  or `sample_name`. The default setting (`basename`) will use the
  basename of the file, while `sample_name` will instead use the sample
  name encoded in the file‚Äôs metadata.
- Fixed bug in `extract_metadata` when sub-setting metadata elements.
- Added more informative error and warning messages to
  `extract_metadata`.
- Added `data.table` format option to `extract_metadata`.
- Fixed path issue in `call_openchrom`.
- Updated documentation in README and `call_openchrom` manual concerning
  OpenChrom installation.

## chromConverter 0.7.4

- Use updated syntax for reticulate (hopefully this will solve some of
  the issues with python configuration failure).
- Invisibly return paths to exported CDF files.
- Small updates to documentation (e.g., addition of functional families,
  standardization of function titles and descriptions).
- Fixed Windows path issue when R is installed locally.
- Fixed error reading Shimadzu metadata on Windows (due to ‚ÄúExtra
  content at end of document‚Äù).

## chromConverter 0.7.3

- Updated `read_shimadzu_lcd` to infer retention times in Shimadzu 3D
  Data from `Max Plot` stream since it is always (?) present.
- Updated `read_shimadzu_lcd` to skip parsing of metadata from 3D Data
  Item when it is not present.
- Updated `read_shimadzu_lcd` to include `Max Plot` stream when parsing
  2D chromatograms.
- Fixed bug in `read_chromeleon` related to inference of decimal
  separators.
- Added `decimal_mark` argument to `read_chromeleon` to manually set
  decimal separator.

## chromConverter 0.7.2

- Added preliminary support for extraction of peak tables from
  ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô `.lcd` files.
- Added support for inference of retention times from ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô `.lcd`
  files lacking `Data Item` streams.
- Added support for raw format File Properties stream in ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô
  `.lcd` files.
- Added support for parsing 3D data field from ‚ÄòChromeleon‚Äô ascii files.

## chromConverter 0.7.1

- Fixed automatic file detection for directories (e.g., Waters `.raw`
  and Agilent `.D`)
- Fixed bug preventing extraction of `Waters` chromatograms with
  lowercase filenames.
- Added support for extracting metadata from ‚ÄòWaters‚Äô `.raw` header
  files.
- Added support for extraction of detector units from ‚ÄòWaters‚Äô
  chromatograms.

## chromConverter 0.7.0

### Major features

- Added preliminary support for ‚ÄòVarian Worktation‚Äô (`.sms`) format
  through `read_varian_sms` function.
- Added preliminary support for ‚ÄòShimadzu QGD‚Äô GC-MS files through the
  `read_shimadzu_qgd` function.
- Added preliminary support for ‚ÄòAllotrope Simple Model‚Äô (ASM) 2D
  chromatography date files.
- Added support for reading multiple files from ‚ÄòAgilent‚Äô `.D`
  directories through `read_agilent_d` function.
- Added internal parser for ‚ÄòAgilent ChemStation‚Äô MS files through
  `read_agilent_ms`.
- Added option to write mzML files (MS1 and DAD).
- Added option to write ANDI MS netCDF files.

### UI changes

- Changed order of arguments in `read_chroms` so that `format_in` comes
  second after `path`.
- Removed extraneous `export` argument from `read_chroms`. To export
  files, you now only need to provide an argument to `export_format`.
- Updated handling of multiple chromatograms by `read_shimadzu_lcd`. The
  function now returns a list of named chromatograms if
  `data_format == "wide"` and returns multiple chromatograms in a single
  `data.frame` if `data_format == "long"`.
- Added `scale` argument to `read_chemstation_uv` and
  `read_shimadzu_ascii` to toggle scaling of chromatograms.
- Harmonized file path arguments across parser functions by changing
  `file` arguments to `path`.
- Harmonized column names in output across parsers.
- Small changes in `read_cdf` UI: `what` now defaults to `NULL` and
  defaults are coded into downstream `read_andi_chrom` and
  `read_andi_ms` functions.
- Added extra verbosity in `read_chroms` when `verbose` is `TRUE`.

### Other improvements

- Fixed bug causing reticulate to attempt reinstallation of Aston every
  time the package is loaded (due to case sensitivity of packages names
  in
  [`reticulate::configure_environment`](https://rstudio.github.io/reticulate/reference/configure_environment.html)).
- Added `data.table` as an option for `format_out`.
- Improved speed of `read_shimadzu_lcd` by dealing with twos-complements
  more sensibly.
- Start ‚ÄòShimadzu LCD‚Äô chromatogram retention times at dwell time (DLT).
- Give temp files generated from Shimadzu OLE files informative names.
- Use ‚ÄòOutput Date‚Äô field instead of ‚ÄòType‚Äô to find ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ASCII
  delimiter. (This seems to be a more generalizable solution since some
  files do not contain the ‚ÄòType‚Äô field).
- Allow relative paths for `path_out` when using ‚ÄòThermoRawFileParser‚Äô
  and ‚ÄòOpenChrom‚Äô parsers.
- Allow creation of new directories by `read_chroms` if `path_out` does
  not exist.
- Fixed bug affecting some `mdf` files lacking null bytes after the file
  header.
- Eliminated ‚Äòmagrittr‚Äô dependency by using xpath to parse XML in a more
  straightforward fashion.
- Fixed bug causing truncation of sample names at the first period by
  `read_chroms`.
- Modified `export_csv` function to label first column for wide-format
  chromatograms.
- Improved handling of metadata from rainbow parsers.
- Fixed error when providing single chromatogram to .
- Added metadata field for source checksum (SHA1) and source file
  format.
- Other minor changes to metadata fields.
- Return all times in Coordinated Univeral Time (UTC) for consistency
  across systems.

## chromConverter 0.6.4

- Added support for ‚ÄòAgilent ChemStation‚Äô version 8 (`.ch`) files
  through `read_chemstation_ch`.
- Fixed failure to return units in some `Agilent Chemstation` files due
  to typo.
- Fixed bug causing ‚Äúspill-over‚Äù of Agilent metadata fields.
- Fixed bug causing failure to read `ChemStation` CSV files on (some)
  mac machines by specifying little-endian format in call to `read.csv`.

## chromConverter 0.6.3

- Added parser for total ion chromatogram (TIC) stream in ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô LCD
  files.
- Added additional support for extraction of metadata from ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô
  LCD and GCD files.
- Updated docs for `read_shimadzu_lcd_2d` to more accurately reflect
  file structure.
- Added `scale` argument to `read_chemstation_ch` and
  `read_shimadzu_lcd` to toggle scaling of chromatograms resolving
  ([\#30](https://github.com/ethanbass/chromConverter/issues/30)).

## chromConverter 0.6.2

- Updated `read_shimadzu_lcd` function to correctly determine the number
  of blocks in the ‚ÄúShimadzu‚Äù LCD PDA stream (thanks to
  [kco-hereon](https://github.com/kco-hereon)).
- Added preliminary support for 2D data streams from ‚ÄúShimadzu LCD‚Äù
  files.
- Added parser for ‚ÄòShimadzu GCD‚Äô files (from GC-FID).

## chromConverter 0.6.1

- Added support for ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ASCII files with ‚Äò\[LC Chromatogram‚Ä¶\]‚Äô
  sub-header.
- Correct ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ASCII chromatograms by ‚ÄòIntensity Multiplier‚Äô if it
  is provided.
- Fixed bug in logic in `export_cdfs` function to permit conversion of
  files lacking metadata.
- Minor, cosmetic changes to documentation.

## chromConverter 0.6.0

- Added parser for reading ANDI MS (`.cdf`) files.
- Fixed parsing of Agilent MS files with ‚Äòentab‚Äô reader.
- Fixed `read_chemstation_ch` parser to correctly read ‚ÄúMustang
  Chemstation‚Äù 179 files with 8-byte encoding.
- Re-factored `read_shimadzu` function and added support for new types
  of chromatograms (e.g.¬Ýstatus, uv and total ion chromatograms). Added
  support for reading multiple types of chromatograms at once.
- Added support for reading MS spectra from ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ascii files using
  `read_shimadzu`.
- Exported `write_cdf` and added additional arguments (`lambda` and
  `force`) for greater control by users.
- Added internal parser for 1D ‚ÄòWaters RAW‚Äô chromatograms
  (`read_waters_raw`).
- Added `collapse` argument to `call_rainbow` and to collapse
  superfluous lists.
- Added `...` argument to `read_chroms` for supplying additional
  arguments to parsers.
- Added alias to `read_chroms` for reading `mzxml` files with `RaMS`.
- Added `precision` argument to `call_rainbow` to control number of
  digits ‚Äúmz‚Äù values are rounded to. (Also changed default behavior so
  values are rounded to one decimal by default).
- Fixed bug in `read_shimadzu_lcd` on Windows due to issue with passing
  escaped paths to Python.
- Updated documentation of various functions.

## chromConverter 0.5.0

### New features

- Added support for parallel processing through `pbapply` package.
  (**Note**: The `pbapply` package must be manually installed to enable
  parallel processing).
- Added internal parser for ‚ÄòAgilent ChemStation‚Äô version 31 files
  (through `read_chemstation_uv` function).
- Added support for ‚ÄòAgilent OpenLab‚Äô version 131 files through internal
  parser.
- Added preliminary support for reading ‚ÄòAgilent‚Äô (`.dx`) files (through
  `read_agilentdx` function).
- Added support for reading ‚ÄòChemStation‚Äô REPORT files.
- Added parser for Shimadzu `.lcd` files through the `read_shimadzu_lcd`
  function. Only the PDA stream (not MS) is currently supported.
- Added `read_peaklist` function for reading peak lists. Currently
  ‚ÄòAgilent ChemStation‚Äô and ‚ÄòShimadzu ASCII‚Äô formats are supported.
- Added `verbose` argument to control console output for external
  parsers (‚ÄòOpenChrom‚Äô and ‚ÄòThermoRawFileParser‚Äô).

### Other Improvements

- Improved automatic file type detection by `read_chroms`.
- Refactored `read_thermoraw` function to simplify paths.
- The `thermoraw` and `openchrom` parsers now use a proper temp
  directory if an export directory is not specified through the
  `path_out` argument.
- Re-factored `reshape_chroms`, speeding up conversion from wide to long
  format.
- Added additional tests, attaining 82% test coverage.
- Changed default `openchrom` export format to `mzml`.
- Minor changes to some metadata fields to better standardize results
  across different file formats and parsers.

### Bug fixes

- Corrected ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô DAD parser so it reads wavelengths from the file
  instead of inferring them.
- Fixed bug causing failure of ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ascii parser (when
  `what == "peak_table"` and `read_metadata == TRUE`).
- Fixed bug causing ‚ÄòMDF‚Äô files to export as data.frames when
  `format_out == "matrix"`.
- Fixed misleading `data_format` attributes in ‚ÄòWaters ARW‚Äô and
  ‚ÄòChromeleon‚Äô parsers.

## chromConverter 0.4.3

- Fixed bug in `chemstation_ch` parser (version 130)
  ([\#17](https://github.com/ethanbass/chromConverter/issues/17))

## chromConverter 0.4.2

- Added support for parsing ‚ÄúWaters‚Äù ascii (`.arw`) PDA files.

## chromConverter 0.4.1

### New features

- Added support for ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù UV (`.ch`) files (version 30).

### Minor improvements

- Updated `read_chromeleon` to better deal with comma decimal separators
  in metadata.
- Updated `read_chromeleon` to deal with more datetime formats.
- Updated `read_chromeleon` to deal with unicode microliters.
- Added tests for rainbow parser and `read_chemstation_ch`.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed bug preventing compilation of PDF manual.
- Fixed new bug causing failure to correctly read names of ‚ÄòChemStation‚Äô
  files from .D directory.

## chromConverter 0.4.0

### New features

- Added parser for ANDI chrom `cdf` files through the `read_cdf`
  function.
- Added parser for ‚ÄòLumex‚Äô `.mdf` files through the `read_mdf` function.
- Added additional options for file exports. New options for writing
  `chemstation_csv` (utf-16) and ANDI chrom `cdf` files through
  `read_chroms`.
- Added preliminary support for automatic filetype detection by
  `read_chroms` when providing direct paths to files (i.e.¬Ýwhen
  `find_files == FALSE`).
- Added `read_varian_peaklist` function for reading peak lists from
  ‚ÄòVarian MS Workstation‚Äô.

### Other improvements and bug fixes:

- Added `wide` and `long` `data_format` options for 2D data, such that
  the `wide` format option writes retention times as rownames of the
  matrix or data.frame. while the `long` format writes retention times
  as the first column of the object.
- Updated `configure_openchrom` for better discovery of ‚ÄòOpenChrom‚Äô path
  and added `path` argument for directly specifying the path to
  ‚ÄòOpenChrom‚Äô.
- Slightly restructured metadata fields. Added `source_file` field to
  track data origin.
- Standardized datetime stamps so they are always converted to POSIXct
  format.
- Now use `fs` package for parsing paths, eliminating buggy
  `check_paths` function.
- Fixed bug causing sloppy ‚ÄòChemStation‚Äô FID metadata.
- Fixed bug that caused padding of ‚ÄòChemStation 130‚Äô files with extra
  zeros.
- Added additional tests.

## chromConverter 0.3.3

- Added R-based parser for ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù UV (`.uv`) files (version 131)
  through the `read_chemstation_uv` function.
- Added `extract_metadata` function for extracting metadata from a list
  of chromatograms and returning it as a `data.frame` or `tibble`.
- Added `progress_bar` option in `read_chroms`.
- Updated `reshape_chroms` and `reshape_chrom` to allow switching
  between ‚Äúwide‚Äù and ‚Äúlong‚Äù formats.
- Added wide format option in `read_mzml`.
- Added automatic detection of file formats by `read_chroms`.
- Minor changes to storage of metadata in attributes for the purpose of
  simplification.
- Fixed bug preventing removal of file extensions for ‚ÄòAgilent‚Äô data
  when using `read_chroms`.
- Standardized run date/time in metadata to `POSIXct` format.
- Minor updates to documentation.

## chromConverter 0.3.2

- Fix ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ascii parser so it can cope with variable entries in
  PDA header.

## chromConverter 0.3.1

- Added support for ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù UV (`.ch`) files (version 130).
- Added provisional support for ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù FID (version 8).
- Changed name of `read_chemstation_fid` function to
  `read_chemstation_ch`.
- Ignore case when matching file extensions in `read_chroms`.
- Added note to README about configuring RStudio correctly for accessing
  python parsers.

## chromConverter 0.3.0

- Fixed bug causing ‚ÄúChromeleon‚Äù metadata parser to fail.
- Fixed bug in ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù metadata parser.
- Changed `format_data` argument to `data_format` to select wide or long
  format.
- Added support for parsing `mzML` files with `RaMS`.
- Added support for parsing ‚ÄúAgilent‚Äù (`.D`) and ‚ÄúWaters‚Äù (`.raw`) files
  with [rainbow](https://rainbow-api.readthedocs.io/).
- Made `data_format` option available consistently for choosing `wide`
  or `long` format.
- Added parser in R for ‚ÄúChemStation‚Äù FID (`.ch`) data (versions 81, 179
  & 181).
- Improved error handling when loading python modules.
- Improved error-handling for parsing metadata so small problems no
  longer error out the whole program.

#### Shimadzu ascii parser

- Fixed bug in ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ascii parser that was cutting chromatograms
  short.
- Added automatic detection of decimal separator for reading
  European-style files.
- Generalized algorithm to acquire ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô DAD metadata.

## chromConverter 0.2.2

- Fixed bug in `call_openchrom` so that it can actually find ‚ÄòOpenChrom‚Äô
  path.
- Fixed bug in `call_openchrom` to allow ‚Äòaniml‚Äô as valid
  `export_format`.
- Allow ‚ÄòThermo RAW‚Äô files to be parsed using ‚ÄòEntab‚Äô.

## chromConverter 0.2.1

CRAN release: 2022-07-11

- Added `configure_aston` function for configuration of Aston parsers
  and fixed issues with configuration of Aston.

## chromConverter 0.2.0

#### New features and formats

- Added `read_shimadzu` function for parsing ‚ÄòShimadzu‚Äô ascii files.
- Added `read_chromeleon` function for parsing ‚ÄòChromeleon‚Äô ascii files.
- Added `read_thermoraw` function to convert ‚ÄòThermo Raw‚Äô files by
  calling the ‚ÄòThermoRawFileParser‚Äô.
- Added `read_mzml` function to extract UV data from mzML files using
  mzR.
- Added `call_entab` function for calling Entab parsers.
- Added `call_openchrom` to call OpenChrom parsers through the
  command-line interface.

(All of the new functions described above can be called from the
`read_chroms` function by setting the `format_in` and `parser`
arguments).

- New option to read and attach instrumental metadata to chromatograms
  by setting `read_metadata = TRUE` in `read_chroms`.

#### Simplification of `read_chroms` syntax

- `read_chroms` will now automatically assign a parser if the parser
  isn‚Äôt specified.
- `read_chroms` will throw more informative errors for mismatch between
  `format_in` and `parser` arguments.
- `read_chroms` will try to automatically determine if files or
  directories are being provided.

#### Other changes to `read_chroms` syntax:

Dots were replaced with underscores in all arguments to `read_chroms`
for internal syntactical consistency across the package. Thus:

- The argument to specify the format of R objects was changed from
  `R.format` to `format_out`.
- The argument to specify the format for exported files was changed from
  `format.out` to `export_format`.

## chromConverter 0.1.0

CRAN release: 2022-04-19

- Added a `NEWS.md` file to track changes to the package.
